# Building Will be Different

Inspired by so many 2025 wrap ups, I have decided to make my own summary and think about key learnings from the past year, as well as how it reshaped my approach to building software.

My biggest learning is that I was naive to believe that the ability to build software would be enough to create a startup and make something on my own. Well, I was sort of aware of it before. The last moment I had this feeling was back in 2024 when I pitched Straighty and QuantumFit, Computer Vision based fitness apps that were nice, but probably would have impressed people 10 years ago. Those were one of the last moments to build something like that, sell it, or even get some nice funding and make a startup out of it.

## Lesson I: Being able to Build Apps means nothing!

Thanks to AI, building software is more democratized than ever. That's why what matters now is the unfair advantage. Being able to ship software means nothing if you want to build something on your own. You should also have some insights or be top 5% among the rest of humanity in some certain topic. Of course there are probably some exceptions, or just super lucky people. But still, even if you build a very cool app that really addresses some real problem, it will be very difficult to get funding, find users, and simply make crazy money out of it.

Speaking of this, a couple of days ago I had a chat with my cousin during our Christmas dinner. He told me a story of a Tire Shop owner who literally vibe-coded the app for his business. He first learned about frontend, backend, SQL etc. with AI, to later vibe-code the whole app where his workers could enter the state of the tire service on each workstation. The info would then show upstairs in his also vibe-coded management app. Even though I am super skeptical about the reliability of this app, and I am almost sure that it has tons of tech debt, it works. And since it's mainly local - who cares? The dude said that he had this in mind for years, but it would take months and burn probably a few hundred thousand euros to outsource such an app creation to some software house. On top of it, I am sure that there would be weeks wasted on back and forth communication between him and the software house. The result would probably be far from his initial imagination.

Does it mean we are stepping into a completely new era? Where businesses can build and iterate directly on their business problem without a need to rely on the tech team. It's very brave to think this way, but come on - imagine we had this conversation barely 3 years ago. It would have been pure fantasy. Now it's becoming a reality.

I also know a couple of similar cases like that, where people built - or let's call it vibe coded - their business vision. Somehow they achieved something that we as builders and programmers struggle to achieve for years: get real users and create apps that actually make money. This leaves me with lots of thoughts. What is the main purpose of software? Maybe just like Steve Jobs mentioned years ago, we should focus first of all on the user experience and then move backwards to the technology? 

In the last few years I spent countless hours building commercial and pet projects. Some PRs used to have dozens of comments, long discussions over using type vs interface, about so many details that made marginal difference if any on the app performance side. I personally recall projects where we put years in the development, caring about every single detail to make the code clean and the tech debt as small as possible. Yet in the end, when the project was about to be released, it was killed due to many complications such as compliance, budget, or simply no market for the given app. 

Maybe it's time to change the approach. It also reminds me of 2020/21 when people were discussing constantly evolving no-code solutions and if they were about to replace the programmers. I also heard that people were complaining about higher level programming languages, including Pascal and Java. From what I know, we had similar discussions already back in the 80s when high-level programming languages with lots of abstractions were getting more and more popular. 

At the time of writing this blog post, I am also in the middle of the book Quo Vadis by Andrzej Dragan. He brings examples of how AI was struggling with some logical riddles in Polish back in 2023, yet 2 years later it was beating most of the people. He also brings the example of Magnus Carlsen and his approach to playing (or not playing) against AI. No matter what, I slowly start to think that the ability to simply code and understand it thoroughly is slowly losing its meaning. 

I do not want to say here that programmers are already obsolete. We still need human experience to control it all, but more and more can be done even without their supervision at the very first stage. Just with this single difference we can already cut a lot of costs and time on the initial prototyping. Most likely we will either see a trend of experts in some niche fields - such as backend Java developers that know almost everything about Spring Boot, or some Kafka topics master - as well as more generalists that have some knowledge about programming in general but do not have to be top experts in any specific technology. With all of that, we will not only be able to prototype and build much faster, but also we will most likely need less and less people for the given projects. Those who will struggle the most in the market will most likely be junior to mid developers.

## Lesson II: Top 1% Unfair Advantage

In 2025 I was lucky enough to have quite a lot of chances for meeting some key people from the VC world. I also talked to dozens of startups from all around the world. Once again, just a few years ago I thought that being able to code, build, and craft software in general was some sort of a super skill itself. Well, not anymore. 

One of the things that struck me was that VCs do not care that much about your project, but rather about the team and their abilities. Being able to build software and generally having this builder mindset is one thing. But what most of them are looking for is also the unfair advantage of knowing something that most of the people on earth do not know. On the other hand I met many very talented people building their own startups. For instance, I met a guy who is building a startup in the health space, focused on vaccines. Despite the fact that he spent years studying biology, medicine etc., he also managed to learn how to code, build frontend, backend, the whole infrastructure including databases and message queues, up to training the ML models. This is just one of the examples from the top of my head, but hopefully it sparks the idea of how things work now.

I remember that back in 2019/2020 when I was entering the IT field, I met so many people in the IT world, sometimes even building startups, that knew almost nothing about the field that they are building the solution for. Of course it would be nice to know, but their task was simple - just understand the context enough and go build it. What mattered the most was the technical delivery. Very often people were not even interested in what they are building. This also happened to me many times, and I think that we still have this sort of notion going on. 

However, with the evolution of AI and the new trends, maybe it's a good change that software is slowly being built more often by the people who really care about the given case. In the end, it will be better for both the developers as well as the end users. I know it may sound a bit too romantic, and even if it's true - it means that coding skills are not enough anymore, and we have to put way more on our shoulders to be ahead.

Having this in mind, my lesson here is that probably we should not jump on the train of an unknown field just because it seems reasonable. What's more, when you build something that aims to solve some sort of problem, it's better to understand the issue from the user perspective and have a really good understanding of it. Seems quite obvious, but I feel like most of us forgot about it in the process.

## Lesson III: The Leads

A few weeks ago I had a chat with someone who spent some time in the SF area, attending lots of startup events. We met to discuss my new startup idea. I already had an MVP ready to apply for YC Combinator. In the first 5 mins, I knew that I probably spent way too much time on solving a real issue that I have no idea about. Even though the problem is there, and there are still not enough solutions, I realized that I may not be the best person to solve it. I simply do not know the process. My whole knowledge is based on the opinions and experiences of others. 

He told me a story instead, about a guy who recently won a startup pitching event. Even though it was probably the least interesting presentation of the evening, the guy still managed to get the most attention. How? Well, simply he was not only a technical guy who had a solid understanding of how computers work, but he also worked for over 10 years in the railway industry. Therefore he knew about the legacy software they use, how to make it better, and he already had a first big customer in line. Probably we could find many other people with similar coding skills, and maybe even better presentation skills. But how many of them have the insider knowledge like him as well as the first big customers willing to pay for the solution?

It also reminds me of the book called The Cold Start Problem, where the author talks about the problems of Uber-like apps. The main issue here is of course acquiring users. Very often, I hear sayings such as "Facebook is not that good, there are better apps and there is room to make a better app". Well, indeed yes it's true - there is room to improve almost everywhere. These days especially, it's probably not that difficult to make "better" versions of well known apps. The problem is how much better, when it comes to scale. It's easy to add more features, make it more beautiful, or even improve the overall user experience. But how about the infrastructure - how is the indie developer's app going to behave under a heavy load? These are still all tech questions, but where are the users? 

It's especially true for B2C apps. That's why it's getting harder and harder to create a successful B2C app as an indie developer. First of all, the market is flooded. Secondly, it costs a lot to reach the users. For the last 3 years I have been trying to build a modern interactive Fitness app that could track the user movement over the camera with Computer Vision, as well as speak to the user using the latest LLMs for even better feedback. On my way, I met quite a few very influential figures in the fitness industry, such as the founder of the fitness app of one of the most popular sportsmen in the last decade. We spent a couple of hours discussing our apps, but what left me thinking was especially one fact - the distribution. 

Despite the fact that they had such a name behind the app and over a decade on the market, they still had to pour millions of dollars monthly into ads just to make the app profitable. How in this world can an unknown indie developer, even with a very solid and good B2C app, make it through? This all brings me to another assumption: the code itself starts to mean less and less. What matters is the go to market strategy, exposure, and the leads. 

These days, nearly everyone has a social media account, and most of us are posting things from time to time. Many of us also dream of getting more and more followers. However, how many of us managed to break the barrier of at least 1000 subscribers? Not to mention 10k, 100k, 1 million and so on. Probably there is some luck included as well as some unfair advantages, but in the end it's still all hard work of posting nearly every day and producing high quality content (it's not always the case in my opinion unfortunately). That's why it's also not a surprise why influencers earn more and more, and why even big companies tend to pay a lot of money simply for the numbers on their accounts.

## Building Will be Different - The Verdict

Building software was for me one of the most exciting, yet sometimes also frustrating activities. But in the end I loved spending time building things out of my pure imagination. It was something that I could finally achieve, after blending two other worlds where I also lived. By these I mean the world of mechanics and the world of art and literature. From one side, physical solutions requiring lots of resources that not always scale. On the other hand, art where we can create nearly everything but there is very rarely any practical solution to a real problem. 

Software was like art for me for years, where one could express themselves without need for physical resources, at the same time solving real-world problems at scale. On top of it, there was also this satisfaction of solving complex challenges, starting from CodeWars coding challenges, ending up on designing a solution for a complex problem. It was basically like a game, but a game where the outcome could really help others as well as build our valuable skills.

I recall times when I used to carry my laptop with me all the time, even when I was on a walk or traveling. I would sit down somewhere for an hour or two, immerse myself in this creative focus time, only to go back to traveling or simply walking after. So is it irrelevant now? Well, yes and no. These skills still do matter. Even back in the day, we could still find solutions on GitHub or StackOverflow, but at the end of the day, in most cases we still had to do our work of adjusting the given solution to our particular problem. 

Now, I feel like we can just keep gambling in this AI casino, until the agent finally finds all of the bugs and fixes the code itself. While writing this, I already have several examples when I tried to compete with a non-technical friend. I tried to debug and fix the problem on my own, and on the other hand he was just brute forcing the solution by prompting AI. This year, it was the first time I have to admit that even though I was able to debug and fix the problem myself, AI was faster. You may say that I am just a mediocre programmer and that's why - probably there would be a lot of truth to that. But even so, how many years from here until we reach the point where it will be faster than even the top notch programmers? 

That's why, at least for me, crafting a solution in code doesn't feel the same. Maybe it's just my subconsciousness or maybe we just need a mindset shift to treat it just like another level of tooling. No matter what, it's definitely a turning point. And from here the deeper we go, most likely it will start to become a new standard - only to look at this post in a couple of years with pure nostalgia. How will it be? Let the future write the rest.
